# PODNAME: Yancy::Help::Standalone
# ABSTRACT: How to run Yancy without writing Perl code

=head1 SYNOPSIS

To see the Yancy UI in action with some sample data, do this in a checkout
of the repo:

  $ cp eg/test-app/yancy.data.json yancy.data.json
  $ cp eg/test-app/myapp.conf yancy.conf
  # t/lib is to provide Yancy::Backend::Test
  $ perl -Ilib -It/lib bin/yancy daemon &

Having done the above, now visit L<http://localhost:3000/yancy>.

Alternatively, you can try some test data, together with the
L<read_schema|Yancy::Help::Config/read_schema> feature to automatically
configure the API from the database schema:

  $ export TEST_ONLINE_SQLITE=sqlite:/tmp/test.db
  # run the test, put the test data in a disk file
  $ prove -l t/backend/sqlite.t
  $ echo >yancy.conf "{backend=>'$TEST_ONLINE_SQLITE', read_schema=>1}"
  $ perl -Ilib bin/yancy daemon &

=head1 Getting Started

To run Yancy as a standalone application, you must create
a C<yancy.conf> configuration file that defines how to connect to your
database and what the data inside looks like. See L<Yancy::Help::Config> for
details.

B<NOTE:> Yancy does not have authentication or authorization built-in.
If you want to control which users have access to data, you should use
a plugin like L<Yancy::Plugin::Auth::Basic> or an HTTP proxy with these
features.

Once the application is started, you can navigate to C<<
http://127.0.0.1:3000/yancy >> to see the Yancy administration app.
Navigate to C<< http://127.0.0.1:3000/ >> to see the getting started
page.

=head1 Rendering Content

In the standalone app, all paths besides the C</yancy> application are
treated as paths to templates. If a specific template path is not found,
Yancy will search for an C<index> template in the same directory. If that
template is not found, an error is returned.

The templates are found in the C<templates> directory. You can change
the root directory that contains the C<templates> directory by setting
the C<MOJO_HOME> environment variable.

Template names must end with C<< .format.ep >> where C<format> is the
content type (C<html> is the default). You can render plain text (C<txt>),
JSON (C<json>), XML (C<xml>), and others.

Database content can be read by using the database helpers that Yancy
provides.

=over

=item * C<< yancy->list( $collection ) >> - Get a list of items

=item * C<< yancy->get( $collection, $id ) >> - Get a single item

=item * C<< yancy->set( $collection, $id, $data ) >> - Update an item

=item * C<< yancy->delete( $collection, $id ) >> - Delete an item

=item * C<< yancy->create( $collection, $data ) >> - Create an item

=back

Some example template code:

    %# Get a list of people
    % my @people = app->yancy->list( 'people' );

    %# Show a list of people names 
    <ul>
        % for my $person ( @people ) {
            <li><%= $person->{name} %></li>
        % }
    </ul>

    %# Get a single person with ID 1
    % my $person = app->yancy->get( 'people', 1 );

    %# Write the person's name to the page
    <p>Hi, my name is <%= $person->{name} %>.</p>

More information about L<Mojolicious> helpers is available at
L<Mojolicious::Guides::Rendering>.

=head1 Plugins

In standalone mode, you can configure plugins in the Yancy configuration
file. Plugins can be standard L<Mojolicious::Plugins> (with a name
starting with C<Mojolicious::Plugin>, or they can be specifically for
Yancy (by extending L<Mojolicious::Plugin> and having a name starting
with C<Yancy::Plugin>).

Plugins are configured as an array of arrays under the `plugins` key.
Each inner array should have the plugin's name and any arguments the
plugin requires, like so:

    {
        plugins => [
            [ 'PodRenderer' ],
            [ CGI => [ "/cgi-bin/script" => "/path/to/cgi/script.pl" ] ],
        ],
    }

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Yancy>

