# PODNAME: Yancy::Help::Upgrading
# ABSTRACT: Changes and deprecations when upgrading Yancy

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes any breaking changes or deprecations that occur
as part of Yancy's development and how to make your code work with newer
versions of Yancy.

=head1 VERSIONS

=head2 v2.000

The upcoming v2.000 release has the following breaking changes and
deprecations:

=over

=item "collections" stash key is now "schema" in Yancy configuration

The main "collections" configuration is now called "schema". This name
is more descriptive and will allow for future enhancement of
controllers, form plugins, and other such (see next item).

=item "collection" stash key is now "schema"

In L<Yancy::Controller::Yancy>,
L<Yancy::Controller::Yancy::MultiTenant>, L<Yancy::Plugin::Auth::Github>, L<Yancy::Plugin::Auth::Token>, and
L<Yancy::Plugin::Form::Bootstrap4>, the "collection" configuration is
now called "schema". This makes the config the same as the global plugin
config and also allows for a future enhancement to provide ad-hoc
schemas to these modules (to edit a subset of an existing schema or
create a form for anything).

=item Editor without authentication is deprecated

With the new L<Yancy::Plugin::Auth> system in-place, it is now extremely
easy to set up a simple authentication scheme for your site. With
Yancy's "secure by default" philosophy, this means ensuring the editor
is secure.

You can secure the editor by configuring an auth plugin that
the editor will automatically use. You can further secure the editor by
setting the C<editor.require_user> configuration to filter which users
are allowed to use the editor.

    editor => {
        # users with is_admin set to 1 are allowed to use the editor
        require_user => { is_admin => 1 },
    },

To disable authentication for the editor, set C<< require_user => undef
>>. This is not recommended, as any user can then edit any data in your
site (including their own user data, potentially giving them enhanced
privileges).

=item The Auth::Basic plugin is deprecated

The Auth::Basic plugin was a temporary solution for authentication until
the L<Yancy::Plugin::Auth> system could be built. Since that is built,
the Auth::Basic plugin is deprecated. This plugin is naive at best and
has a terrible method of adding authentication to the Yancy editor which
does not allow for any future enhancement.

The Yancy::Plugin::Auth system allows for multiple authentication
methods in a single site for a single user and provides a unified login
page for users to use.

=item api_controller configuration is deprecated

The C<api_controller> configuration to L<Mojolicious::Plugin::Yancy> has
been replaced with the C<default_controller> configuration to
L<Yancy::Plugin::Editor>.

    # Old config
    api_controller => 'MyController',

    # New config
    editor => {
        default_controller => 'MyController',
    },

=item yancy.route helper is deprecated

The Yancy editor has been moved into a plugin, L<Yancy::Plugin::Editor>.
Since the C<yancy.route> helper was the editor's route, that has now
changed to the C<yancy.editor.route> helper.

=item yancy.openapi helper is deprecated

The Yancy editor has been moved into a plugin, L<Yancy::Plugin::Editor>.
Since the C<yancy.openapi> helper was the editor's
L<Mojolicious::Plugin::OpenAPI> instance, that has now changed to the
C<yancy.editor.openapi> helper.

=item Yancy::Controller::Yancy::API is deprecated

The L<Yancy::Controller::Yancy::API> class was originally only for the
Yancy editor to use. This was also the class to inherit from in order to
customize how the server handled requests from the editor. This caused
duplication with L<Yancy::Controller::Yancy>, and they slowly diverged
into different features (despite having the same goals).

Now, the editor uses L<Yancy::Controller::Yancy> by default, and
Yancy::Controller::Yancy has been enhanced to support everything that
Yancy::Controller::Yancy::API could do (like searching and JSON in the
request body).

To get back to the old API, set C<editor.default_controller> to
'Yancy::Controller::Yancy::API'. This class will be removed in v2.000,
so you may want to create your own API controller (and set
C<editor.default_controller> accordingly).

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Yancy>
